---
title: Futhark 0.1.0 released
author: Troels Henriksen
description: Announcement for the first ever release of the Futhark compiler.
---

We have just released the first version of the Futhark compiler,
version 0.1.0 (`source tarballs here
<https://github.com/diku-dk/futhark/releases>`_).  Of course, nothing
much has changed, given that the compiler source code has been freely
available for over three years, and is not particularly `hard to
compile
<http://futhark.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation.html#compiling-from-source>`_.
Also, nightly binary builds have been `available
<https://futhark-lang.org/releases/>`_ for a good while.

Why a release now?
------------------

There are several reasons: One is the real reason, and the others a
collection of justifications.  The real reason is that I always wanted
to do a release to mark the conclusion of my PhD studies.  Since I
handed in my thesis on the 31st of August (defense scheduled for
mid-November), the time had come.  A collection of secondary reasons
contributed to the feeling that the stars were right:

  * Futhark has matured.  There are no large-scale language changes on
    the near horizon, and the compiler is fairly stable and generates
    decent code.  We have not added major new optimisations recently,
    so no significant bugs should lie undiscovered.

  * We want to emphasize that Futhark is a practically oriented tool
    intended for real usage.  Since established software projects make
    releases, `so do we <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cargo_cult>`_.

  * Version numbers are a good yardstick when communicating with the
    world.  It is nicer to talk what changed "between version 0.1.0
    and 0.2.0", than "from early October to mid-March" (or whenever
    the next release will be).

  * We are about to embark on developing significant new language
    features (higher-order functions) and compiler capabilities
    (gradual flattening and memory block merging).  These clearly
    deserve a version bump, but we can't very well do that if we don't
    have version numbers.

Future Release Policy
---------------------

As alluded to above, we will bump the version number to mark major
changes or additions, but it is not yet clear how often we will
perform releases.  We will follow `semantic versioning
<http://semver.org/>`_, and given that Futhark is still an
experimental research language, we are certainly likely to make
backwards-incompatible changes from time to time - at least until we
hit version 1.0.  It is unlikely that we will make actual bugfix
releases, unless they are particularly dire, but you never know.

Most likely, releases will coincide with major publications, or
perhaps uses of Futhark in academic courses (actually, the 0.1.0
release coincides with a course in `Parallel Functional Programming
<http://kurser.ku.dk/course/ndak14009u>`_ that will take place at
`DIKU <http://diku.dk>`_ in a few weeks).  If (as is the hope and
goal) Futhark starts seeing use outside of academia, probably we will
have to think a little more about a release schedule.
