---
title: Futhark 0.6.3 released
author: Troels Henriksen
description: We didn't even break compatibility this time.
---

Today we released a new version of the Futhark compiler (`full
changelog <https://github.com/diku-dk/futhark/releases/tag/v0.6.3>`_).
The most notable thing, perhaps, is that this is the *third*
compatible release in a row.  That's a new record!  The reason is that
the language itself is stabilising, as `the 0.6.1 release removed the
last major warts from the language
<2018-07-09-futhark-0.6.1-released.html>`_.

Of course, the language stabilising doesn't mean we can't start
breaking the included library instead.  This related to the most
significant improvement in Futhark 0.6.3 - the new package manager
(which I wrote about both `before
<2018-07-20-the-future-futhark-package-manager.html>`_ and `after
<2018-08-03-the-present-futhark-package-manager.html>`_ it was
implemented).  I have been quite busy in trying to turn pieces of the
basis library into separate packages (`here's a list
<https://futhark-lang.org/pkgs/>`_).  Since incompatibly changing the
basis library constitutes a breaking language change, it seems like a
good strategy to minimise its scope, and instead provide a good
package manager.

In conclusion, the next version of Futhark will definitely break
compatibility, as it will be stripped of most of the basis library.
On the upside, it will have `a just merged C# backend
<https://github.com/diku-dk/futhark/pull/612>`_ implemented by Mikkel
Storgaard Knudsen.
