---
title: Futhark 0.19.1 released
description: Feels like students did all the work for this one.
---

We made another one ([full changelog
here](https://github.com/diku-dk/futhark/releases/tag/v0.19.1)).  This
is a major release, which means that we broke compatibility.  So what
happened?  Did we [change type of a fundamental
constructs](2020-10-08-futhark-0.18.1-released.html) or [add a ton of
novel type
rules](https://futhark-lang.org/blog/2020-03-15-futhark-0.15.1-released.html)?
Sort of: the `negate` function that we deprecated in 0.18.6 is now
gone, and you must use `neg` instead, thus [addressing another
regret](https://futhark-lang.org/blog/2021-01-11-no-regrets.html#short-names).

Since I don't think that this <s>change</s> *improvement* by itself is
going to be the killer feature that pushes Futhark into the
mainstream, I'll also mention some of the things we added since the
last release announcement.

One improvement that actually landed in 0.18.4, but which I never got
around to writing about at the time, is that our CUDA backend now uses
a much more efficient implementation of `scan`, based on a clever
[single-pass
technique](https://research.nvidia.com/publication/single-pass-parallel-prefix-scan-decoupled-look-back).
This is really an abuse of the GPU programming model, but NVIDIA
promises that it's fine - and they use the same technique in
[CUB](https://github.com/NVIDIA/cub).  With this implementation,
`scan` is almost as fast as `map`, and since `scan` is such a [crucial
building block for many parallel
algorithms](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~guyb/papers/Ble93.pdf), this has
significant impact by making e.g. radix sorting and filtering much
faster.  I only wish I knew of a similar technique for AMD GPUs.  The
work was done by Andreas Nicolaisen and Marco Aslak Persson for [their
master's thesis](../student-projects/marco-andreas-scan.pdf) at
[DIKU](https://diku.dk).

Another significant improvement is automatic register tiling of
certain classes of nested parallel loops.  [Loop
tiling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loop_nest_optimization) is a
family of locality optimisations, which can be quite important for
memory-bound code.  The Futhark compiler has supported a fairly
general block tiling optimisation for years, but register tiling can
improve performance on e.g. matrix multiplication by at least another
factor of two.  Tiling is very sensitive to choice of tile sizes, and
the compiler is not yet very good at automatically picking good
default sizes, so some manual tweaking of tuning options is needed to
obtain the best performance.  We hope to address that soon - it
shouldn't be very difficult.  This improvement was *also* done by
students, namely Anders Holst and Æmilie Bom Cholewa-Madsen, for their
bachelor's thesis.

The final improvement I will write about is perhaps somewhat obscure,
but it touches on interesting aspects of language design.  For a long
time, Futhark has contained a facility for doing parallel scatter
operations, exposed to the user as the function `scatter` of the
following type:

```Futhark
val scatter 't [m] [n] : (dest: *[m]t) -> (is: [n]i64) -> (vs: [n]t) -> *[m]t
```

Given an array `dest` and two arrays `is` and `vs` of indexes and
values respectively, `scatter dest is vs` returns `dest` but with the
elements at the positions given by `is` replaced by the corresponding
values in `vs`.  This is a useful building block, but limited in that
we can only update points in a one-dimensional array.  If we wish to
scatter into a two-dimensional array, we must first `flatten` it,
manually compute the corresponding flat indexes, perform the
`scatter`, and then `unflatten` it back to its original shape.  This
is clumsy.  Worse: it confuses the compiler and inhibits optimisation.

So, why is `scatter` not polymorphic in the `dest` array?  Because to
the type checker, `scatter` is just another function, and the type
system is not strong enough to express an property such as "the `is`
array contains `p`-ary tuples, where `p` is the rank of `dest`".  All
functions, even those that map directly to compiler intrinsics, *must*
be expressible in the type system.  As a workaround, our PhD student
[Philip Munksgaard](https://munksgaard.me/) added functions
`scatter_2d` and `scatter_3d` that support 2D and 3D arrays,
respectively.  This is a pragmatic solution, but it is not beautiful
(and what about 4D arrays?).

The great irony is that this problem does not exist in the core
language we use inside the compiler.  In the core language, `scatter`
(and all other intrinsics) are not functions, but rather special
language constructs with their own ad-hoc rules and semantics.  We can
get away with a lot more in the core language, because it does not
have to support type inference or polymorphism.  Can we do the same
thing in the source language?  Possibly!  Even in the source language,
language constructs that have their own syntax can also have their own
ad-hoc rules for type checking and inference.  Adding lots of special
syntax to a language is not good design, but since `scatter` is [part
of the minimal
basis](2019-04-10-what-is-the-minimal-basis-for-futhark.html), it may
deserve it.

Futhark already has a notation for array updates: `a with [i] = v`,
which returns `a` with the value at index `i` replaced by `v`.  If we
allow `i` to be an array, then we have a decent notation for `scatter`
(we must also require that `v` is an array of the same size as `i`).
It is straightforward to use the existing notation for
multidimensional updates `a with [i,j] = v` to then support
arbitrary-dimensional scattering.

Type inference such an extended construct is somewhat challenging, and
I have yet to make up my mind on whether to require special syntax for
the `scatter` case.  If not, the expression `a with [i] = v` will, in
the absence of any other information, give rise to the somewhat
convoluted type checking constraint "`i` must have type `i64` *or*
`[n]i64` for some `n`, and in that case `v` must also be an array of
size `n`.  I long ago decided quality of type errors was more
important than minimising the number type annotations, but we'll see
whether we can make it work.

One unsolved problem is `scatter`s cousin, `reduce_by_index` (also
known as [generalised
histogram](2018-09-21-futhark-0.7.1-released.html#histogram-computations)),
which similarly suffers from being limited to a single dimension.
However, I have not been able to come up with a good syntax that would
allow us to promote it to the level of a language construct.
