---
title: Futhark 0.22.13 released
author: Troels Henriksen
description: New backend, new fusion, lots of bugs fixed.
---

Mighty software isn't *released*, rather it *escapes*, and so Futhark
0.22.13 just did ([full changelog
here](https://github.com/diku-dk/futhark/releases/tag/v0.21.13)).  In
contrast to most of the releases since the [last release I bothered
writing a blog post about](2022-04-15-futhark-0.21.9-released.html),
this one has important user-visible improvements.  I will merely
summarise most of the changes since the last announcement, either
because they are small or because I already wrote about them, but one
of them (an entirely new backend for vectorised CPU code) deserves a
longer exposition.

The summarised changes are as follows.

* **Entirely new fusion engine.**  Fusion of parallel loops is perhaps
  *the* single most important optimisation in the entire Futhark
  compiler, and one of the first we implemented.  The fusion algorithm
  was always conceived of as a graph reduction algorithm (as described
  in [our very first paper](../publications/fhpc13.pdf)), but the
  actual implementation was based on two traversals of the AST, with
  the dataflow graph existing only implicitly.  It worked well enough
  to remain around for years, but it was difficult to understand how
  the algorithm corresponded to the code, impossible to extend it in
  certain ways, and had a few bugs that were difficult to fix.

  As their master's project at [DIKU](https://diku.dk), Amar Topalovic
  and Walter Restelli-Nielsen replaced the old fusion engine with a
  [new one](https://github.com/diku-dk/futhark/pull/1670) that
  implements the same algorithm, but by explicitly transforming a
  graph representation of the program based on a set of rules.  While
  this also [fixes a few
  bugs](https://github.com/diku-dk/futhark/issues/953), the main
  improvement is to serve as a good foundation for further
  improvements.  The impact on programs is negligible, as a central
  goal was to reproduce the behaviour of the old fusion engine, but
  it's quite impressive that two students managed to rebuild a
  critical part of the Futhark compiler as part of their master's
  thesis.

* **Exposing the structure of records in the external API**, as
  discussed in [a previous blog
  post](2022-07-01-how-futhark-talks-to-its-friends.html).

* **Deprecation of using `==` on arrays.**  This is because we are
  working on a language improvement that we have code-named **AUTOMAP**
  because silly names helps keep you motivated, but which is more
  commonly known as *vectorisation* or *broadcasting*.  The idea is to
  allow functions to apply to arrays without having to use `map`
  explicitly; for example allowing programmers to write `A + B`
  instead of `map2 (map2 (+)) A B` when adding two matrices.
  Unfortunately, since `==` is an operator like any other, this means
  that its behaviour will change from returning a boolean indicating
  whether two arrays are equal, to returning a boolean array
  indicating the *element-wise* equality of the arrays.  If desired,
  this array can then be passed to `reduce` to see if all the
  components are true.

* **Migration of sequential code to GPU.**  Another master's thesis
  project, this one by Philip Børgesen.  This is a GPU pipeline
  optimisation pass that [migrates non-parallel code to the
  GPU](https://github.com/diku-dk/futhark/issues/1045) in order to
  reduce CPU-GPU communication.  This is a known GPU programming
  technique, but Futhark until now used a fairly naive compilation
  strategy of running all parallel code on the GPU, and all
  surrounding sequential code on the CPU.  This requires moving data
  back and forth over the PCIe bus as well as expensive
  synchronisation.  Even though the GPU isn't great at running purely
  sequential code, it can still outperform the CPU for small nuggets
  of computation when the data is already present on the GPU.

  This summary doesn't truly express how extremely *thorough* Philip's
  work was, which among other things involved designing a variant of
  the [Ford-Fulkerson max flow
  algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ford%E2%80%93Fulkerson_algorithm)
  to minimise CPU-GPU communication.  See [his
  thesis](../student-projects/philip-børgesen-msc-thesis.pdf) for the
  full details and a performance evaluation.

## A new backend

This Futhark release comes with a new parallel compiler backend
courtesy of the students Pema Malling, Louis Marott Normann, Oliver
Petersen, and Kristoffer Kortbæk, who implemented it for their
bachelor's thesis.  (See a pattern?  Also, [thesis
here](../student-projects/ispc-bsc-thesis.pdf).)  This backend is an
extension of the [multicore CPU backend that Minh Duc Tran
implemented](2020-10-08-futhark-0.18.1-released.html#new-backend) (as
his master's thesis, as you might by now expect) to make better use of
the [SIMD
instructions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_instruction,_multiple_data)
that are supported by modern CPUs.

To understand how the new backend works, first let's recap how the
existing multicore backend works in simplified terms.  Ultimately the
question is how to execute in parallel a small collection of built-in
parallel primitives, roughly corresponding to generalised variants of
the source-language functions `map`, `reduce`, `scan`, and a few
others.  Consider `map` as the simplest case.  Every element is
independent of the others, so in principle you could start a new
thread for each one in order to maximise parallelism.  In practice,
the overhead of such maximal parallelism is not worth it.  Your CPU
does not have a million cores - it has perhaps 16.  So instead, we
split the array being `map`ed into a number of *chunks*, assign a
chunk to each CPU core, after which each thread performs a
*sequential* `map` on its chunk.

Even though we have now decided not to exploit *thread* parallelism
inside each chunk, we are semantically still dealing with `map`, and
each iteration is still independent.  Modern CPUs have SIMD
instructions that allow *data parallelism* - performing the same
operation on different data - which we can use to execute the
otherwise sequential `map`s.  The performance advantage of using SIMD
instructions are very context-dependent, but at a high level, it seems
clearly better to have one instruction working on multiple pieces of
data at once.  In principle, an SIMD addition instruction operating on
vectors of four numbers each should be four times faster than having
to execute four distinct addition instructions.

In principle, a C compiler could automatically *vectorise* the loops
produced by the existing `multicore` backend and make them use SIMD
instructions.  In practice, auto-vectorisation is quite fragile, so it
doesn't happen except for very simple cases.  Ironically, I'm not a
big fan of black-box compiler optimisations, especially when they are
fragile.  Thus the core idea of the new backend: instead of processing
each chunk sequentially within a thread, uses SIMD instructions to
further squeeze out a bit of performance.

Another person who doesn't much like auto-vectorisation is [Matt
Pharr](https://pharr.org/matt/).  In fact, he found auto-vectorisation
so fragile that [he invented a new programming language called
ISPC](https://pharr.org/matt/blog/2018/04/30/ispc-all) in order to
make vectorisation more reliable.  ISPC is a low-level data-parallel
language like CUDA, in which multiple *program instances* are active
simultaneously, and where *vectorisation cannot fail*.  It is a
property of the programming model, rather than a black-box compiler
optimisation.  The new Futhark backend, tellingly named `ispc`,
generates ISPC code for the per-chunk loops (the sequential `map`s).
This makes it the responsibility of the ISPC compiler itself to select
the right SIMD instructions for a given CPU - this is the kind of
stuff we really don't have the resources to maintain ourselves.  One
disadvantage is that ISPC isn't really intended as a compilation
target, but students fortunately have high pain tolerance, so they
managed to make it work - even very exotic stuff, such as dynamic
bounds checking.

So what is performance like?  It's a bit unpredictable.  ISPC is very
sensitive to *static* memory access patterns and control flow, and the
students solely focused on backend work.  The input code they are
compiling is produced by the existing multicore pipeline, and is not
at all optimised for SIMD execution in terms of memory layout and
nested parallelism.  On
[mandelbrot](https://github.com/diku-dk/futhark-benchmarks/tree/master/accelerate/mandelbrot)
I get about *1.67x* speedup on my laptop with a Ryzen 4750 CPU
compared to the `multicore` backend.  Not much, but it's free
performance - all it requires is passing `--backend=ispc` to the
Futhark compiler.

On
[crystal](https://github.com/diku-dk/futhark-benchmarks/tree/master/accelerate/crystal)
I get a speedup of *6.78x*, which is far more than I would expect.
The probable cause is that ISPC uses CPU intrinsics for trigonometric
operations such as sines and cosines, while a C compiler will normally
make a function call to the math library.

On [Barnes-Hut
n-body](https://github.com/diku-dk/futhark-benchmarks/blob/master/accelerate/nbody/nbody-bh.fut),
the `ispc` backend sees a *slowdown* of *0.62x* compared to
`multicore`.  This is because the core of this program is an irregular
romp through a tree structure, which is poorly suited to SIMD
execution - or at least the kind of SIMD code we currently generate.

We hope to improve these results by adding dedicated optimisation
passes to the compilation pipeline used for the `ispc` backend.  If
you're a student, feel free to hit us up!

## The fruits of forced labour

Exploiting students as a source of free labour has [long been part of
the Futhark development
process](2017-12-27-reflections-on-a-phd-accidentally-spent-on-language-design.html).
It's also not unusual in academia in general, and jokes about [dusty
decks](http://www.catb.org/jargon/html/D/dusty-deck.html), developed
by generations of students, are common.  The punchline tends to be
about the *code quality* of these systems, which tend to be
monstrosities developed by accretion as each contributor added
whatever they required for their immediate needs, without any
consideration for overall design.  Many research compilers are exactly
like this, and ever since we started development of Futhark, I was
terrified that we would end up like that.

While Futhark has received many contributions from students, I think
we have managed to avoid these problems.  The overall code quality of
the compiler is still pretty high, judging by the ease with which we
can still make changes and the relatively low bug density quantity.
Further, the bugs we *do* have tend to be localised logic errors,
rather than unintended interactions between distinct components.  I
have a few guesses for how we managed this:

* **Take software engineering seriously.**  The Futhark compiler is
  cleanly designed as a frontend, middle-end, and back-end.
  Interaction between these parts is through value-oriented
  interfaces.  There is no mysterious hidden state in the form of
  global symbol tables.  Compiler passes are functions from input
  program to output program.  If you prettyprint any of these
  intermediate programs, what you see is the *full* state of the
  compiler.  This makes it pretty easy to define new passes without
  having to modify much of the compiler, or to remove ones if they
  turn out to be broken.  Only changes to the intermediate
  representation, which are rare, require non-local changes.

* **Be honest about the difficulty.**  While we are certainly actively
  recruiting students (it's free labour!) we are honest about how
  difficult it is to work on a nontrivial compiler.  We are not
  interested in having students *at all costs*.  Some students aren't
  up for doing applied projects at this level of complexity, and
  that's *fine*.

* **Say no.**  Even *if* a student manages to complete a project, and
  even *if* they get a good grade, it is not a given that their code
  will make it into the compiler.  We do not expect students to stick
  around to maintain their contributions, so we only merge code that
  we believe we can maintain long-term on our own.  As an example, a
  student has [been experimenting with supporting multi-GPU execution
  in the CUDA backend](https://github.com/diku-dk/futhark/pull/1654),
  which has not yet been merged.  This is not because the student did
  bad work, but because the problem is inherently really hairy,
  requires modifications to our GPU runtime system, and it is not yet
  clear that this approach is the right one in the long run.

* **Treat the student as an open source contributor.**  For this
  latest run of projects, I asked the students to make draft pull
  requests quite early on.  This let me do systematic code reviews
  (and fixes), correct misunderstandings, and make sure that the
  students didn't go too far down incorrect paths.  Having regular
  supervision meetings about concepts and ideas is well and good, but
  *actually reviewing* concrete code line-by-line helped this last
  batch of projects have even higher code quality than usual.

* **Be lucky.** Maybe we just got really lucky this last semester.  In
  that case, let's just hope that we stay lucky.
