---
title: Bridging Futhark and SML
description: Connecting Futhark to the industrial Standard ML language will surely bring us into the mainstream.
---

Futhark is not a general purpose language, and Futhark programs are
typically used as libraries from other languages. This mainly happens
[through a C-based
API](https://futhark-lang.org/blog/2017-09-26-calling-futhark-from-c-and-haskell.html),
but of course some programmers do not like writing their application
code in C. Fortunately, due to C's popularity, most languages have
ways of invoking code written in C. The [raw C
API](https://futhark.readthedocs.io/en/latest/c-api.html) exposed by a
compiled Futhark program is not particularly convenient by modern
standards, so it is usually a good idea to write a bit of glue code to
wrap the C types in more ergonomic high level types. Construction of
such glue code can be automated, and we call such a generator a
[bridge](https://futhark-lang.org/docs.html#bridges). Bridges already
exist for languages such as
[Haskell](https://gitlab.com/Gusten_Isfeldt/futhask),
[Python](https://github.com/pepijndevos/futhark-pycffi/), Rust
([three](https://github.com/Erk-/genfut)
[of](https://github.com/zshipko/futhark-bindgen)
[them](https://github.com/luleyleo/cargo-futhark)), and
[OCaml](https://github.com/zshipko/futhark-bindgen). All of these were
written by people not directly involved with the Futhark compiler
itself. In this post I will discuss the construction of a new bridge,
written by myself, for the [Standard ML](https://smlfamily.github.io/)
(SML) language. It may be interesting to people who also need to worry
about language interoperability.

## Standard ML

SML is a functional language stretching back to the 70s, and was one
of the main drivers behind language features that are now common, such
as Hindley-Milner type inference. It was also arguably one of the
first statically typed functional languages that were generally
usable; with several production-grade compilers available since the
early 90s. SML is also unusual for being perhaps the *only* industrial
programming language with [a formal
definition](https://github.com/SMLFamily/The-Definition-of-Standard-ML-Revised).

Today, SML is nearly dead. The reasons why languages such as OCaml and
Haskell managed to overtake SML in popularity are interesting, but a
different topic. However, *nearly dead* is not dead, and not only are
multiple high quality SML compilers still maintained
([MLton](http://mlton.org/), [MLKit](https://elsman.com/mlkit/),
[Poly/ML](https://www.polyml.org/),
[SML#](https://smlsharp.github.io/en/),
[SML/NJ](https://www.smlnj.org/), and more), [interesting applications
written in SML](https://isabelle.in.tum.de/) are also still around,
and [cutting edge research on language
implementation](https://github.com/MPLLang/mpl) is still being
conducted using SML compilers. Personally, SML was the first language
I was taught at [DIKU](https://di.ku.dk/), and although I dismissed it
at the time when compared to Common Lisp and Haskell, I eventually
started to appreciate its simplicity. Finally, I work about 10 metres
from the maintainers of two *different* SML implementations (MLKit and
[MosML](https://mosml.org/)). Despite its obscurity, SML is
over-represented in my daily life and research.

## Bridge construction

Futhark's C API is designed to be simple to use not just from C, but
also from languages that have fairly crude facilities for invoking C.
We call the language calling Futhark-generated C code the *bridge
language*. In particular, all types Futhark exposes are *fixed size*:
either by being standard primitive types (e.g. `int32_t`), or by being
pointers. Users of the API *never* have to allocate memory on the C
heap or use `sizeof` or similar. For example, constructing a
configuration object is done with a function with the type

```C
struct futhark_context_config *futhark_context_config_new(void);
```

where `struct futhark_context_config` is an opaque struct. This means
that you cannot use the common performance trick of allowing the
caller to allocate the memory in advance, but in practice most Futhark
functions do so much internal work that this would not be a meaningful
performance advantage. Not all languages can easily interoperate with
unpredictably sized C structs, but most of them can figure out how to
pass pointers around.

Some functions *do* require the caller to allocate memory in advance,
such as the function that copies data from a Futhark array (which may
reside on the GPU) to some location in memory. We call this a `values`
function, and for arrays of type `[]f64` it might look like this:

```C
int futhark_values_f64_1d(struct futhark_context *ctx, struct futhark_f64_1d *arr, double *data);
```

The `data` argument must point to some place in memory with enough
room for the entire array. The size of the array is obtained with a
different API function and multiplied with the element size, which is
statically predictable.  There are two subtleties here:

1. While most languages allow you to create an empty array of some
   size, passing this array as a pointer to a C function is not
   necessarily straightforward. This is only safe if the language
   guarantees that the in-memory representation of the array is
   "unboxed"; meaning it corresponds to what C expects. If the
   language does not guarantee this, you need to allocate raw memory,
   ask Futhark to copy the array to that location, and then copy the
   elements into the bridge language array - which can be quite slow.

2. The `values` function is allowed to copy *asynchronously*, meaning
   the copy might still be physically ongoing when the function
   returns. This allows overlapping copies with other work, which can
   be important for performance. Unfortunately, many of the potential
   bridge languages use *garbage collection*, and most garbage
   collectors do not guarantee that objects do not move around in
   memory. If an array was moved whilst Futhark was copying data into
   it, the results would likely be disastrous. Some languages allow
   one to allocate non-movable "pinned" memory, but unless great care
   is taken, it is best to generate glue code that performs a full
   synchronisation after calling the `values` function.

Another minor thing, but which turns out to be a big convenience, is
that the Futhark compiler will emit a
[manifest](https://futhark.readthedocs.io/en/latest/c-api.html#manifest)
(a JSON file) that describes the entire generated API in a
machine-readable way. This is useful, as which functions are available
depends on which entry points are defined in the Futhark program, and
which types they expose. Prior to adding the manifest, bridges had to
analyse the generated C header file, which is awkward and error-prone.

Futhark's C API reports errors via return codes, following the usual
0-means-success convention. This is notoriously error prone and
tedious to handle in C, but at least it is very easy to wrap in
whichever error handling facility is customary in the bridge language,
such as exceptions.

Memory management is a more tricky business. Futhark does not allow
the construction of circular data structures and thus internally uses
reference counting, but it has no way of knowing when the user is done
with some piece of data. Therefore the user is responsible for
eventually freeing all data returned by Futhark, using a
Futhark-provided function (that in practice just decrements a
reference count). While C programmers are famously known for *never*
making mistakes when doing manual memory management, programmers of
more high level languages are more imperfect, and therefore it is
advisable for a bridge to hook into the automatic memory management
(reference counting,
[finalizers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finalizer)) of the bridge
language.

## Implmentation of `smlfut`

The Futhark/SML-bridge has been implemented as a program
[smlfut](https://github.com/diku-dk/smlfut). You pass it a Futhark
manifest file and it will spit out SML code as well as a bit of glue C
code. I had hoped to avoid the need for generating C, but I needed to
do a few (uninteresting) things that could not be expressed directly
in SML.

SML has a [very nice module
system](https://jozefg.bitbucket.io/posts/2015-01-08-modules.html)
that allows one to write a *signature* that abstractly describes the
interface implemented by a module. `Smlfut` makes good use of this.
For example, the Futhark program

```Futhark
def inc (xs: []i32) = map (+2) xs
```

currently gives rise to this collection of SML signatures:

```SML
signature FUTHARK_POLY_ARRAY =
sig
  type array
  type ctx
  type shape
  type elem
  val new: ctx -> elem ArraySlice.slice -> shape -> array
  val free: array -> unit
  val shape: array -> shape
  val values: array -> elem Array.array
  val values_into: array -> elem ArraySlice.slice -> unit
end

signature FUTHARK_OPAQUE =
sig
  type t
  type ctx
  val free : t -> unit
end

signature FUTHARK_RECORD =
sig
  include FUTHARK_OPAQUE
  type record
  val values : t -> record
  val new : ctx -> record -> t
end

signature FUTHARK = sig
  val backend : string
  val version : string

  type ctx
  exception error of string
  type cfg = {logging:bool, debugging:bool, profiling:bool, cache:string option}

  structure Config : sig
    val default : cfg
    val logging : bool -> cfg -> cfg
    val debugging : bool -> cfg -> cfg
    val profiling : bool -> cfg -> cfg
    val cache : string option -> cfg -> cfg
  end

  structure Context : sig
    val new : cfg -> ctx
    val free : ctx -> unit
    val sync : ctx -> unit
  end

  (* []i32 *)
  structure Int32Array1 : FUTHARK_POLY_ARRAY
  where type ctx = ctx
    and type shape = int
    and type elem = Int32.int

  structure Opaque : sig
  end

  structure Entry : sig
    val inc : ctx -> Int32Array1.array -> Int32Array1.array
  end
end
```

The particularly interested can [read the fine
manual](https://github.com/diku-dk/smlfut/releases/download/latest/smlfut.pdf),
but the most interesting thing is that Futhark arrays must be
associated with some SML type, here the built-in polymorphic `array`
type, such that Futhark arrays can be converted to SML-comprehensible
data. More on that design decision in a bit.

It is also interesting (for people who find that sort of thing
interesting) that identifiers from the Futhark program can influence
identifiers in the SML program; in this case, the name of the entry
point `inc`. What happens if a Futhark entry point has a name that is
not a valid SML identifier? For `smlfut`, I have decided to emit an
error. Users can always pick better public names, and this is better
than coming up with complicated escaping rules. (This rule of course
does not apply to names that are not visible in the API.)

### Compiler support

Since SML has so many compilers in use, my initial plan was to support
several of them. However, due to unexpected technical friction, only
MLton (and its fork [MPL](https://github.com/MPLLang/)) is currently
supported. The main obstacle is that while the [SML Basis
Library](https://smlfamily.github.io/Basis/top-level-chapter.html)
defines an interface for [monomorphic
arrays](https://smlfamily.github.io/Basis/mono-array.html), which I
would expect implies an unboxed representation, only MLton actually
seems to implement this interface for all necessary primitive types.
For example, MLKit (generally my favourite SML compiler) only
implements monomorphic arrays for the types `Char8` (`uint8_t`) and
`Real` (`double`). SML/NJ, which generally has good support for the
Basis Library (they invented it), also has a rather anemic selection
of monomorphic arrays. This is ironic because in MLton, *polymorphic
arrays also have an unboxed monomorphic representation*, so I don't
actually need to use monomorphic array types in order to access their
elements from C. Since `smlfut` already has a command line option for
switching between monomorphic and polymorphic array interfaces, I am
considering adding a switch that allows one to copy Futhark arrays
into `Char8` monomorphic arrays, and make it up to the user to
interpret the raw bytes as proper numbers.

While [MLton's FFI](http://mlton.org/ForeignFunctionInterface) is
somewhat basic, the Futhark C API was designed to accomodate this, and
I did not encounter any real obstacles. I did not get very far with
the MLKit implementation, but this was due to array type challenges,
not the FFI.

### Resource management

While MLton *does* support finalizers, neither MLKit nor MPL does. As
a result, `smlfut` requires manual resource management by the user.
There is no nice way to put it: this is a *major* downside. I hope to
come up with a solution somehow, but beyond simply using finalizers
*when available*, I'm not sure what to do.

### What does it feel like to `smlfut`?

It feels good, if somewhat verbose. This is a small chunk of SML code
that makes use of the Futhark program above:

```SML
val ctx =
  Futhark.Context.new Futhark.Config.default
val arr_in =
  Futhark.Int32Array1.new ctx (ArraySlice.full (Array.fromList [1, 2, 3])) 3
val arr_out =
  Futhark.Entry.inc ctx arr_in
val arr_sml =
  Futhark.Int32Array1.values arr_out
val () =
  Futhark.Int32Array1.free arr_in
val () =
  Futhark.Int32Array1.free arr_out
val () =
  Futhark.Context.free ctx
```

And in particular, it has already proven useful for some work I've
been invited to participate in. More on that in the future, hopefully.
