---
title: Futhark 0.26.3 released - now with property-based testing
description: A quick release with not too much new stuff, but one very big things that I hope will eventually change how we test Futhark programs.
---

I just tagged a new release of Futhark - version 0.26.3. The attentive reader
will of course notice that the middle version number has increased compared to
the [last release announcement](2026-02-02-futhark-0.25.35-released.html), which
we use to indicate that we have broken backwards compatibility somehow. But
also, given that this release is 0.26.**3**, it is clearly not the release that
did so. I actually did write [a blog
post](2026-04-29-breaking-api-compatibility.html) on why we broke compatibility,
so that's not the topic of this post. Rather, I want to talk about the flagship
feature of the new release, property-based testing, courtesy of the two students
Matin Nafar and Simon August Mørk ([as is
tradition](2024-02-03-quantifying-student-projects.html)).

Property-based testing is a strategy to testing software where, instead of
providing predefined input-output pairs, you provide a property that should hold
(such that a sorted function produces a permutation of the input), and the tool
then randomly generates inputs, looking for an example that will make the
property fail. It's one of those techniques that are not guaranteed to work, but
tend to work pretty well in practice. Haskell's QuickCheck library popularised
the idea, but today it exists for many languages - it is my impression that the
Erlang ecosystem is perhaps the most enthusiastic user.

I actually did [already write a blog post on a certain facet of the
design](2026-03-25-property-based-testing.html). For those following along at
home, we eventually resolved this design question through a combination of
option 4 and 5. To cut to the chase, this is how we now define a minimal test
program with a property stating that all integers are even:

```Futhark
-- ==
-- property: all_i32s_are_even

#[prop]
entry all_i32s_are_even (x: i32) = x % 2 == 0
```

If we pass this program to `futhark test`, it will chew for a bit and dutifully
reply:

```
PBT FAIL: all_i32s_are_even size=50 seed=18384861974223310616 after 1 tests
Counterexample: 655892471i32
```

(Specific message format subject to change.)

I really like the ergonomics of this. It's not as if QuickCheck for Haskell is
particularly hard to use, but it requires more ceremony than this. Because
Futhark values are ultimately transparent to the tooling ([value
orientation!](2026-04-22-value-oriented-programming.html)), `futhark test` can
do automatic generation and shrinking of values. Is it very good? No, probably
not yet: I have reason to suspect there are smaller non-even numbers than
`655892471`, although the question remains open for now. The system is
extensible however, so if we wish, we can define our own shrinking function:

```Futhark
-- ==
-- property: all_i32s_are_even

entry shrink_i32 (x: i32) (seed: u64) = x >> i32.min 32 (i32.u64 seed)

#[prop(shrink(shrink_i32))]
entry all_i32s_are_even (x: i32) = x % 2 == 0
```

A shrinker for a type `t` is a function of type `t -> u64 -> t`, where the `u64`
is a random number that the shrinker can use to make decisions - here it is how
much I shift the integer by. With this, we now get a startlingly smaller result:

```
PBT FAIL: all_i32s_are_even size=50 seed=11373889006282598657 after 1 tests
Counterexample: 1i32
```

We will probably have to spend more effort on improving automatic shrinking and
generation of values (in particular, the generator for arrays will currently
always produce square arrays), but I believe it is possible to make it quite
practical for many cases.

If we wish, we can define our own value generators. This is particularly useful
when we have internal invariants, particularly on array sizes, that are not
visible to the automatic value generator. A generator for functions of type `t`
is a function of type `i64 -> u64 -> t`, taking a size and random seed as
arguments. Example:

```
-- ==
-- property: all_i32s_are_even

entry gen_i32 (size: i64) (seed: u64) = i32.i64 size & i32.u64 seed & !1

#[prop(gen(gen_i32))]
entry all_i32s_are_even (x: i32) = x % 2 == 0
```

And now, through the solid engineering employed in the custom generator, our
property now holds.

Writing principled generators manually is too tedious to be practical, so we
intend to also develop a small combinator library to make it easier. However,
the goal is certainly that most reasonable testing can be done using only the
automatic tooling.

I have already [begun the process](https://github.com/diku-dk/sorts/pull/14) of
converting the tests in the various Futhark libraries to be property-based. One
reason I am particularly drawn to property-based testing is that it is *fun*.
Writing up input/output examples is tedious and boring, while figuring out a
nice correctness property for a sorting function is a pleasant intellectual
challenge. Ultimately, I came up with the following helper functions:

```Futhark
-- | How many elements satisfy the predicate?
def count p = map p >-> map i64.bool >-> i64.sum

-- | Correctness property: a sorting function is valid if it produces a sorted
-- sequence, and for every element in the original sequence, the same number of
-- equal elements is present in the original and sorted sequence.
--
-- This is quadratic-time to check, but hopefully this will not be a big problem
-- in practice.
def correct_sort 'a [n] (sort: [n]a -> [n]a) (lte: a -> a -> bool) (xs: [n]a) : bool =
  let xs' = sort xs
  let eql x y = lte x y && lte y x
  in and (tabulate n (\i -> i == 0 || (xs'[i - 1] `lte` xs'[i])))
     && all (\x -> count (eql x) xs' == count (eql x) xs) xs'
```

The function is then used like this:

```Futhark
#[prop]
entry radix_sort_u16 = correct_sort (radix_sort u16.num_bits u16.get_bit) (<=)
```

I wonder how many libraries treat property-based testing as completely first
class, or perhaps even preferred over input/output tests. I doubt Futhark is the
first one. Hopefully we are not in for a rude surprise as to why it's not more
popular.
